NARRATOR: THE GLOBALIZATION
OF THE WORLD'S ECONOMY
HAS BROUGHT WITH IT
THE LARGEST MOVEMENT OF PEOPLE
IN THE HISTORY
OF MODERN TIMES.
EVERYWHERE,
MILLIONS OF PEOPLE
ARE ON THEIR WAY
TO SOMEWHERE NEW.
NO WALL OR BARRIER IS STRONG
ENOUGH TO STOP MIGRANTS
AS THEY CROSS INTERNATIONAL
BORDERS ON A JOURNEY
TO WHERE THE ACTION IS:
THE GLOBAL CITIES.
NO MATTER WHERE YOU COME FROM,
IN NEW YORK, YOU FEEL
THAT NOTHING IS UNWELCOME,
AND NOTHING
ALL TOGETHER IMPOSSIBLE.
NEW YORK IS
A CITY OF IMMIGRANTS.
THAT IS ITS HISTORY.
ALMOST EVERYBODY IN NEW YORK
AT ANY GIVEN TIME
OVER THE LAST SEVERAL CENTURIES
CAN TRACE THEIR ROOTS
BACK TO SOMEBODY
WHO'D STARTED OUT IN SOME
OTHER PART OF THE WORLD.
NARRATOR: IMMIGRANTS
CAME TO NEW YORK
FROM THE FOUR CORNERS
OF THE WORLD,
AND ONCE HERE,
THEY WERE SO INTEGRATED
THEY ALMOST COMPLETELY
LOST THEIR ETHNIC IDENTITY
IN THE "GREAT AMERICAN
MELTING POT."
OUT OF MANY, ONE.
ONE PEOPLE.
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE.
BUT THE LATEST WAVE
OF IMMIGRANTS,
MUCH SPICIER IMMIGRANTS,
MOSTLY FROM DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES,
ARE PROVING SLOW TO MELT
INTO THE AMERICAN POT,
AND ARE INSTEAD TURNING
THE MELTING POT
INTO A SALAD BOWL.
MARGIE McHUGH:
MOST PEOPLE WOULD SAY
THAT THEY ARE NOT STRIVING
TO ACHIEVE A MELTING POT
BECAUSE THE MELTING POT
FORCED PEOPLE TO GIVE UP
VERY VALUABLE ASPECTS
OF THEIR CULTURE
AND THAT THE DOMINANT CULTURE
DIDN'T RECEIVE A LOT
OF THE WISDOM AND THE VALUES
THAT WERE THERE
IN SOME OF THE CULTURES
WHO WERE COMING IN.
NARRATOR: IN QUEENS,
A NEW YORK CITY NEIGHBORHOOD,
120 NATIONALITIES ARE
ATTEMPTING TO PRESERVE
THEIR ETHNIC HERITAGE
AND STILL DO WELL
WITHIN AMERICAN SOCIETY.
MALA DESAI:
WHILE I HAVE MANAGED
TO MAINTAIN MY OWN IDENTITY
AND PERPETUATE
OUR TRADITIONAL CULTURE,
AND RELIGION
AND SOCIAL FORMS OF STYLE,
WE STILL HAVE THE ABILITY
TO MIX WITH THE OTHERS,
LEARN ABOUT OTHERS,
COME TOGETHER,
HAVE JOINT PROJECTS.
NARRATOR: SOMETIMES
DELIBERATELY,
MOSTLY UNCONSCIOUSLY,
THE IMMIGRANTS IN QUEENS
ARE STAKING OUT
A NEW CULTURAL MIDDLE GROUND
FOR THEIR CHILDREN
AND GRANDCHILDREN.
AND HERE TO PROVIDE A LINK
WITH MAINSTREAM NEW YORK
IS THE NUMBER SEVEN
SUBWAY LINE,
BUILT TO CARRY THEM FROM THEIR
HOMES IN THE ETHNIC ENCLAVES
TO JOBS IN MANHATTAN.
MICHAEL TEITELBAUM:
WHAT WOULD HAPPEN IF THERE WAS
A SUDDEN... SUDDEN REDUCTION
IN THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE
WORKING AT MINIMUM WAGE
OR BELOW IN NEW YORK CITY
RESTAURANTS?
WELL, I THINK WE KNOW
WHAT WOULD HAPPEN.
THE RESTAURANTS
THAT ARE JUST BREAKING EVEN
WOULD GO UNDER
IF THEY HAD TO PAY HIGHER WAGES.
NARRATOR: WITH GLOBALIZATION
IN THE UNITED STATES,
EMPLOYMENT MARKETS
HAVE BEEN FREED
OF MANY GOVERNMENT RULES
AND RESTRICTIONS
SO THAT IN MOST INSTANCES,
WAGES ARE ENTIRELY
DETERMINED BY THE EMPLOYERS.
IN NEW YORK, IMMIGRANTS
PROVIDE THE WORKFORCE
FOR THESE
NEW EMPLOYMENT MARKETS.
THIS WORKFORCE
IS MOSTLY LATINO,
THE FASTEST GROWING
COMMUNITY IN NEW YORK CITY.
MIGUEL MARTINEZ: JUST BECAUSE
YOU'RE BECOMING A MAJORITY
IS NOT ENOUGH.
WE HAVE TO ENSURE
THAT THEY MAKE
THE OPPORTUNITIES
AVAILABLE TO US
THAT OTHER IMMIGRANTS GROUPS HAD
WHEN THEY CAME TO THIS COUNTRY.
IN THIS CASE,
EUROPEAN IMMIGRANTS
THAT CAME TO THIS COUNTRY.
TEITELBAUM: I THINK
IT IS HARDER AND SLOWER
TO INTEGRATE
THAN HAVE IMMIGRANTS
IN SOME PREVIOUS PERIODS
OF U.S. EXPERIENCE,
PARTLY BECAUSE
IT'S MUCH LARGER
JUST IN NUMBERS TERMS,
PARTLY BECAUSE IT IS HEAVILY
A LOW-SKILLED POPULATION.
NARRATOR: NOT ALL IMMIGRANTS
TO NEW YORK CITY
ARE LOW-SKILLED.
IN FACT,
ONE OF THE KEY PREMISES
OF THE IMMIGRATION ACT OF 1990
WAS THAT THE AMERICAN ECONOMY
HAD IMPORTANT LABOR SHORTAGES,
ESPECIALLY AMONG
HIGHLY-SKILLED WORKERS
SUCH AS COMPUTER ENGINEERS
AND PROGRAMMERS,
AND THAT INCREASED ADMISSIONS
IN SUCH CATEGORIES
WERE REQUIRED.
BRUCE BERNSTEIN:
THEY INCREASED IT IN '96,
I THINK THEY INCREASED IT
AGAIN IN '98 AND 2000.
I THINK THAT
IT'S GREAT TO HAVE IMMIGRATION
BUT WE HAVE TO TRAIN AMERICANS
IN COMPUTER PROGRAMMING.
WE HAVE TO DO A BETTER JOB.
WE HAVE PLENTY OF AMERICANS
WHO ARE UNDEREMPLOYED
OR WHO ARE NOT TAKING PART
IN THE HIGH-TECH ECONOMY.
NARRATOR: IMMIGRANTS ARE
NOT ONLY COMING TO NEW YORK
IN SEARCH OF JOBS
IN THE HIGH-TECH ECONOMY.
IN FACT, MANY IMMIGRANTS
ARE SETTING UP COMPANIES
TO HELP NEW YORK BECOME
A LEADING "E-CITY,"
ARE ARE GIVING JOBS TO AMERICAN
HIGH-TECH SPECIALISTS.
YES, I THINK
THEY HAVE A TREMENDOUS AMOUNT
OF BACKGROUND AND UNDERSTANDING
HOW SOFTWARE IS BEING MADE.
BUT CERTAINLY I THINK THE PEOPLE
THAT PROGRAM THE SOFTWARE
CERTAINLY CAN BE FROM ANY PLACE,
ANYWHERE IN THE WORLD.
THE KEY IS TO FIND
THE BEST PEOPLE TO BUILD IT.
SO, IT DOESN'T MATTER
WHERE YOU COME FROM,
I THINK WHAT MATTERS
IS WHAT YOU CAN DO.
PEOPLE MIGHT COME HERE
FOR A FEW YEARS
AND THEN GO BACK
TO THEIR COUNTRIES
OR COME HERE
FOR A FEW YEARS AND STAY,
SO WE HAVE EVERY CONCEIVABLE
NATIONALITY IN THE INDUSTRY.
McHUGH: PRECISELY BECAUSE
OF THE IMPACT OF IMMIGRATION,
WE'VE BEEN ABLE TO MAINTAIN
A VERY RICH, VIBRANT LIFE
AND HAVE A TOTALLY DIFFERENT
SET OF POSSIBILITIES
FOR THE FUTURE, PRECISELY
BECAUSE THE CITY
HAS BECOME AGAIN A POPULAR
DESTINATION FOR IMMIGRANTS.
NARRATOR:
IMMIGRATION TO NEW YORK CITY
IS AT ITS HIGHEST LEVEL
IN A HUNDRED YEARS.
TWO-THIRDS OF ITS
EIGHT MILLION INHABITANTS
ARE IMMIGRANTS
AND THEIR CHILDREN.
IN A CITY BUILT BY IMMIGRANTS,
THERE IS NOW A POWERFUL
ANTI-IMMIGRATION MOVEMENT
WHICH CLAIMS NEW YORK CANNOT
TAKE ANY MORE IMMIGRANTS.
THERE IS A LOT OF CONCERN
ON THE PART OF MANY PEOPLE
THAT WE HAVE OVER-STEPPED
OUR CAPACITY
TO ABSORB MORE PEOPLE.
AND THIS HAS BEEN
A STRAIN ON THE ECONOMY
AND THE CAPACITY
OF NEW YORK CITY
TO MEET THOSE NEEDS.
THERE HAVE ALWAYS BEEN
VOICES IN AMERICAN HISTORY
THAT CAME FROM PEOPLE
WHO THEY THEMSELVES ARRIVED
AND THEN SAID, "NOBODY ELSE,"
AND THOSE VOICES
HAVE NEVER PREVAILED.
NARRATOR: AND NOWHERE
IN NEW YORK CITY
ARE THE ANTI-IMMIGRATION
VOICES SO UNHEARD
AS HERE IN QUEENS,
WHERE OVER 80%
OF ITS TWO MILLION INHABITANTS
ARE IMMIGRANTS.
INSTEAD, A RESHAPING OF
NEW YORK'S DEMOGRAPHIC PROFILE
IS GOING ON BENEATH
THE ELEVATED WHEELS
OF THE QUEENS #7 SUBWAY LINE.
THE TRAIN STOPS
WITH MADDENING FREQUENCY
EVERY FEW BLOCKS,
YET EACH STATION
BRINGS A NEW
AND DISTINCT ETHNIC EXPERIENCE.
AT THE JACKSON HEIGHTS STOP,
EVERYTHING FROM SIGHTS
TO SOUNDS TO SMELLS
IS SOUTH ASIAN.
[LAUGHING]
MANJIT SINGH: THIS BLOCK
WASN'T THAT POPULAR,
IT WASN'T
A BUSINESS-DRAWING AREA.
PEOPLE WERE NOT COMING.
SO, EVENTUALLY,
WHEN THE INDIAN COMMUNITY
STARTED MOVING ALONG
AND SAW THE DEMAND
FOR THIS ACTUAL STORE
HAS GONE UP SO MUCH MORE
THAN IT WAS BEFORE.
PEOPLE ARE WILLING
TO PAY A LOT MORE
BECAUSE THERE WAS
A CUSTOMER HERE.
INITIALLY, MY HUSBAND
CAME WITH HIS DREAM.
HE CAME AS A STUDENT
AND HE IS A DOCTOR.
WE DECIDED THAT HE'D EXPERIENCE
THAT FOR A YEAR AND COME BACK.
I DIDN'T LAST EVEN SIX MONTHS
ALONE IN INDIA.
I THINK IT WAS THREE OR FOUR
MONTHS AFTER HE HAD LEFT
I SAID, "WHERE'S MY REZA?
I CAN'T BE HERE."
SO I WAS HERE WITHIN
SIX MONTHS OF HIS COMING.
I THINK IT WAS AROUND THREE OR
FOUR YEARS AFTER WE WERE HERE
WE REALIZED THAT THERE
WAS NO GOING BACK.
THIS WAS HOME. THIS WAS
WHERE THE FUTURE WAS FOR US.
UMA HYSOREKAR: WHEN WE CAME
HERE, WE DIDN'T REALIZE
HOW MUCH WE MISSED OUR
CULTURE AND OUR RELIGION.
SO WE WENT OUT OF OUR WAY
TO ESTABLISH OUR RELIGIOUS
FAITH AND OUR RITUALS.
IF YOU GO BACK
TO THE HISTORY OF HINDUISM,
HINDUISM IS ONE OF THE OLDEST,
IN FACT THE OLDEST RELIGION
THAT'S KNOWN TO MANKIND.
THERE IS NO DOGMA,
THERE IS NO ONE LEADER
WHO SAYS, "SO-AND-SO
SAID THIS, SO YOU FOLLOW IT,"
LIKE IN CHRISTIANITY.
HINDUS HAVE THEIR OWN WAY
OF WORSHIPPING.
BUT ULTIMATELY, YOUR GOD
AND MY GOD IS THE SAME
BECAUSE WE USE
THE SAME CENTER.
WHAT IT TEACHES, HINDUISM, IS:
YOU OUGHT TO BE
A GOOD HUMAN BEING,
YOU SHOULD SERVE YOUR FAMILY
WELL, YOUR COMMUNITY WELL.
DO YOUR SERVICE,
THAT IS, COMMUNITY SERVICE.
THEN YOU ARE A GOOD HINDU.
THAT'S IT.
NARRATOR: THE INDIAN
COMMUNITY IN QUEENS
MANAGES TO LIVE
IN A RARE COMBINATION
OF SPIRITUALITY
AND MODERNITY.
AT THE RANI AYURVEDIC
BEAUTY CLINIC AND SPA,
THERAPISTS INTEGRATE
ANCIENT INDIAN TRADITIONS
WITH 21st CENTURY TECHNIQUES
OF BEAUTY CARE.
INDIAN BEAUTICIANS
REMOVE UNWANTED BODY HAIR
BY AN ANCIENT METHOD INVOLVING
TWISTED COTTON THREAD.
BUT THEIR CLIENTS
ARE MOSTLY LATINO,
AND TOGETHER, THEY'RE CREATING
A CULTURAL MIDDLE GROUND
WHERE INDIAN PRACTICES
ARE PERFORMED
TO THE ACCOMPANIMENT
OF SALSA MUSIC,
AND TO THE OVERHEAD RUMBLINGS
OF THE "INTER-ETHNIC EXPRESS,"
SUBWAY #7.
THE TRAIN MOVES ON
THROUGH COMMUNITIES
FROM ARGENTINA,
COLOMBIA, EQUADOR
AND A DOZEN OTHER
LATIN AMERICAN COUNTRIES.
WHEN IT ARRIVES
AT THE CORONA QUEENS STATION,
YOU FIND THERE'S AN ETHNIC
CULTURE BEING FORMED HERE
WHICH IS NOT
MAINSTREAM AMERICA.
FRANK VARDY:
CORONA QUEENS WAS VERY INTACT.
BUT IF YOU WENT THERE,
YOU FOUND PEOPLE FROM GERMANY,
YOU FOUND PEOPLE FROM IRELAND,
PEOPLE FROM FRANCE,
YOU FOUND EVERY EUROPEAN GROUP
THAT YOU CAN THINK OF
LIVING IN CORONA.
NARRATOR: TODAY IN CORONA,
98% OF THE PEOPLE
ARE LATINO.
THEY ARE THE NEW MAJORITY.
THE ISSUE NOW IS
HOW TO TURN THAT AROUND
TO ENSURE THAT THEY HAVE
THE OPPORTUNITIES FOR JOBS,
FOR BUSINESS,
FOR HOME OWNERSHIP,
AND TO ENSURE
THAT THEY ALSO GET
THE RIGHT REPRESENTATION
IN GOVERNMENT.
WE ARE NOT ONLY A MAJORITY,
WE ARE AN ACTIVE MAJORITY
THAT'S STARTING
TO PARTICIPATE AND VOTE.
AND THE ONLY WAY
WE CAN CHANGE THINGS
AND MAKE POLITICIANS
ESPECIALLY UNDERSTAND
THAT IF THEY DON'T HELP THIS
COMMUNITY, THE LATINO COMMUNITY,
THEN WE DON'T HELP THEM
WITH THE VOTE.
NARRATOR: IN A DEMOGRAPHICALLY
SHIFTING NEW YORK,
LATINOS ARE AN
EMERGING POWER BLOC.
THEY HAVE REPLACED BLACKS
AS THE SECOND-LARGEST
ETHNIC GROUP.
2.3 MILLION LATINOS
NOW LIVE IN NEW YORK,
AND THEY COMPRISE
20% OF THE VOTE.
AND, AS THEY FLEX
THEIR NEW POLITICAL MUSCLE,
COMMUNITY ACTIVISTS
ARE MOUNTING A CAMPAIGN
TO ENCOURAGE LATINOS
TO BECOME AMERICAN CITIZENS.
[WOMAN TRANSLATING
SARAMARIA ARCHILA]
WE HAVE HELPED
MORE THAN 11,000 PEOPLE
TO APPLY FOR CITIZENSHIP.
AND AROUND 3,700 OF THEM
WERE GRADUATES
OF OUR CITIZENSHIP COURSES.
WE OFFER CLASSES IN
THE EVENINGS AND ON SATURDAYS.
WE INSIST THAT THE STUDENTS
LEARN ENGLISH,
THE LANGUAGE OF THE COUNTRY
OF WHICH THEY ARE
BECOMING CITIZENS.
THE GREAT MAJORITY
OF OUR STUDENTS
ARE FACTORY WORKERS,
STORE CLERKS, AND DISH WASHERS.
McHUGH: THIS LATEST WAVE
OF IMMIGRATION BEGAN
IN THE LATE 1970s, REALLY
PICKED UP IN THE '80s AND '90s.
SO, WE'VE HAD ALMOST
20, 25 YEARS
WITH A FAIRLY LARGE IMMIGRANT
PRESENCE IN NEW YORK CITY,
BUT WITH VIRTUALLY
NO REPRESENTATION
OF THEIR ISSUES OR CONCERNS
IN OUR POLITICAL LIFE.
MARTINEZ: WE'VE GOT TO
MAKE SURE THAT AS A MAJORITY,
OUR PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEMS
ARE WORKING
BECAUSE THE MAJORITY OF THE KIDS
IN THE PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM
ARE BLACK AND LATINO.
SO WE HAVE TO MAKE SURE
THEY PUT THE MONEY AVAILABLE
TO CONSTRUCT MORE SCHOOLS,
TO HIRE GOOD TEACHERS,
AND TO HAVE
THE BOOKS AVAILABLE
FOR OUR CHILDREN
TO LEARN THE LANGUAGE
AND EXCEL
TO GO INTO THE UNIVERSITIES.
WE HAVE WHAT'S ESSENTIALLY
AN AGING TEACHING FORCE
THAT DOES NOT KNOW HOW TO DEAL
WITH THESE ISSUES OF DIVERSITY
AND LANGUAGE ACQUISITION.
AN INCOMING TEACHING FORCE
THAT HAS SUFFERED THROUGH
20 YEARS OF VERY POOR SCHOOLING
AND PROBABLY DOESN'T
HAVE THE SKILLS IN MANY CASES
TO REALLY DO THESE MORE
SOPHISTICATED SKILL TRANSFERS
AND THEN DEAL WITH ALL THIS
DIVERSITY AT THE SAME TIME.
WHEN A KINDERGARTEN CHILD
COMES INTO OUR SCHOOL,
WE OFFER THE PARENTS
THE OPTION--
THIS IS THE NEW YORK CITY
BOARD OF EDUCATION REGULATIONS--
WE OFFER THE PARENTS
A BILINGUAL PROGRAM.
NOT IN ANY LANGUAGE,
JUST IN SPANISH.
THAT'S THE PREDOMINANT
POPULATION HERE
IN THIS BUILDING.
95% OF OUR CHILDREN
ARE HISPANIC.
INTERVIEWER: HOW MANY PEOPLE
SPEAK SPANISH HERE?
IN OUR CLASS, ALMOST ALL,
EXCEPT SOME THAT ARE
FROM CHINESE AND INDIA.
WHAT DO YOU
SPEAK AT HOME?
I SPEAK ENGLISH.
WHEN MY PARENTS
ARE MAD AT ME,
THEY SPEAK SPANISH.
THE DEBATE ABOUT LANGUAGE
IN THE U.S.
IS OFTEN A PROXY
FOR OTHER CONVERSATIONS
THAT NEED TO HAPPEN ABOUT
PEOPLE'S LEVEL OF COMFORT
WHICH THE WAY IN WHICH
THE COUNTRY IS CHANGING
AND BECOMING MORE DIVERSE.
LIKE, YOU STILL SEE RACISM
IN THE SCHOOL, YOU KNOW.
AND YOU STILL SEE-- WHEN
A WHITE PERSON GOES "NIGGER,"
YOU KNOW, "YOU NIGGER."
FIRST, I WAS BORN HERE,
BUT MY PARENTS RAISED ME
WITH THE DOMINICAN CULTURE,
AND WE'RE STILL
HAVING TROUBLE THESE DAYS
TRYING TO GET ALONG,
BECAUSE...
AND THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC,
THAT'S SOMETHING DIFFERENT.
LIKE OVER HERE IN NEW YORK CITY
WE HAVE MORE FRIENDS,
MORE PEOPLE, MORE STUFF,
YOU KNOW,
AND OVER THERE IT'S DIFFERENT,
IT'S ALL INTO THE FAMILY.
MY MOTHER, SHE CAME OVER HERE
TO TRY TO MAKE A BETTER LIFE,
BECAUSE OVER THERE,
SHE COULDN'T MAKE IT.
THAT'S WHY SHE STEPPED
INTO THIS COUNTRY,
TO GET A BETTER LIFE.
SHE STARTED OUT LOW AND NOW
SHE'S GETTING HER WAY UP.
I TELL HER SHE MUST BE CRAZY.
SHE'S BEEN IN THIS COUNTRY
FOR 20 YEARS,
HAS HAD TWO HOUSES,
A BUSINESS, TWO BUSINESSES,
AND SHE CANNOT
UNDERSTAND ENGLISH.
I DON'T KNOW HOW
SHE HAS PUT THROUGH,
BUT BELIEVE ME,
SHE HAS PUT THROUGH.
[WOMAN TRANSLATING BISONO]
UNFORTUNATELY, I HAD KIDS
WHEN I WAS WAY TOO YOUNG.
I JUST LIVED WITH THEIR FATHER
AND NEVER MARRIED,
BUT I'M PROUD OF MY FAMILY
AND OF WHAT I'VE ACCOMPLISHED.
I LIKE THIS COUNTRY,
BUT I'M OFTEN ASHAMED
THAT I CAN'T SPEAK ENGLISH.
I HAVE PROBLEMS
LEARNING ENGLISH
AND THAT DEPRESSES ME
VERY MUCH.
THAT'S THE ONLY THING
I DON'T LIKE ABOUT LIVING HERE.
TEITELBAUM: IMMIGRANTS COME
WITH CULTURES, BY AND LARGE,
AND IF YOU HAVE
VERY LARGE-SCALE IMMIGRATION,
PARTICULARLY IF IT'S VERY
CONCENTRATED AND CONTINUOUS
FROM CERTAIN REGIONS
OR CERTAIN CULTURES
OR CERTAIN COUNTRIES,
THEN YOU CAN HAVE
A KIND OF FRACTIONATION
OF THE POPULATION,
A BREAK IN THE FLOW OF
INTEGRATION IN THE SOCIETY.
NARRATOR: IN NEW YORK,
PRESSURE TO INTEGRATE
HAS GIVEN WAY TO A STRONG
NEW FOCUS ON MULTICULTURALISM,
AN APPROACH
THAT SEEKS TO GUARANTEE
EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY
WHILE RESPECTING AND EVEN
CELEBRATING DIVERSITY.
AND NOWHERE
IS DIVERSITY MORE OBVIOUS
THAN ON THE #7 TRAIN
AS IT RATTLES ALONG
COLLECTING ALIEN SENSATIONS
AS IT TRAVERSES
OTHER ETHNIC ENCLAVES
ON ITS WAY
TO THE TERMINAL IN FLUSHING.
WE GO TO FLUSHING,
AS AN EXAMPLE,
WHICH IS
THE CENTER OF QUEENS,
A LARGE
COMMERCIAL SHOPPING AREA,
PREDOMINANTLY ASIAN,
99% ASIAN.
IT'S HUMAN NATURE.
WE DON'T LIKE CHANGE.
AND WHEN IT'S SIGNIFICANT
CHANGE, WE LIKE IT EVEN LESS.
NARRATOR: TO AN AMERICAN
OR AN INTEGRATED IMMIGRANT,
FLUSHING ADMINISTERS THE RUDEST
DOSE OF CULTURAL SHOCK.
AMONG THE THRONG OF HUMANITY
ON THE CROWDED SIDEWALKS,
NOT THE LEAST SOUND
OF ENGLISH CAN BE HEARD,
AND FEW WESTERN CHARACTERS MAKE
IT INTO THE JUMBLE OF SIGNS
CAREFULLY SEGREGATED
BETWEEN CHINESE AND KOREAN.
THE REVITALIZATION OF FLUSHING
OVER THE LAST 20 YEARS
HAS BEEN COMPLETELY ATTRIBUTABLE
TO THE ASIAN NEWCOMERS
AND IN SOME RESPECTS
THE LATINO NEWCOMERS.
AND THEN THERE ARE OTHER PEOPLE
WHO WOULD LOOK AT THE PROBLEMS
THAT WE HAVE HERE NOW
AND BLAME THE NEWCOMERS
FOR THOSE PROBLEMS, TOO.
REMEMBER, THE CHINESE
HAD BEGUN ARRIVING IN NEW YORK
IN THE 1880s
AND NEW YORK'S CHINATOWN
HAD GROWN FROM
THAT SETTLEMENT OF CHINESE
THAT HAD MOVED
FROM THE WEST COAST
WHERE THEY'D HELPED BUILD
THE TRANSCONTINENTAL RAILROAD.
NARRATOR:
UNTIL THE EARLY 1960s,
IMMIGRANT VISAS WERE ALLOCATED
ACCORDING TO A NATIONAL ORIGINS
QUOTA SYSTEM INTENDED
TO PREVENT IMMIGRANTS
FROM CHANGING THE NATIONAL
AND ETHNIC COMPOSITION
OF THE UNITED STATES.
THIS RACIST QUOTA SYSTEM
EXCLUDED NEARLY
ALL ASIAN IMMIGRANTS
AND GAVE PREFERENCE
TO EUROPEANS.
IN THE LATE 1960s,
A NEW IMMIGRATION BILL
ELIMINATED RACE
AS A MATTER OF PRINCIPLE,
BUT IN ACTUAL OPERATION,
IMMIGRATION WAS STILL
CONTROLLED BY RACIAL ORIGIN.
WHAT FINALLY
BROUGHT TO NEW YORK
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
OF ASIAN IMMIGRANTS
WAS THE IMMIGRATION ACT OF
1990, THAT PERMITTED EMPLOYERS
TO RECRUIT TEMPORARY FOREIGN
WORKERS OF CERTAIN PROFESSIONS.
BUT THE ASIANS ADMITTED
AS TEMPORARY WORKERS
APPLIED FOR ADMISSION
OF THEIR SPOUSES AND CHILDREN.
TODAY, MORE THAN ONE
OUT OF EVERY TEN NEW YORKERS
IS FROM ASIA.
AND ACCORDING
TO A RECENT SURVEY
UNDERTAKEN BY
THE "COMMITTEE OF 100,"
A NATIONAL ORGANIZATION
COMPOSED OF LEADING AMERICAN
CITIZENS OF CHINESE DESCENT,
PREJUDICE AGAINST ASIANS
IS STILL PREVALENT.
THERE WAS A 25%
HIGH DISLIKING FACTOR.
AND ALSO, MORE OMINOUSLY,
WAS THAT 46% FELT THAT ASIANS
COULD BE A PROBLEM
WHEN IT CAME TO POTENTIALLY
TURNING OVER
SENSITIVE DOCUMENTS
TO FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS.
WHAT HAVE WE DONE
TO DESERVE THIS?
WHAT ACT OF TREASON
CAN BE DOCUMENTED OUT THERE?
WHAT ACT OF ESPIONAGE?
ASIAN-AMERICANS HAVE BEEN
IN THE UNITED STATES
AND IN NEW YORK
FOR OVER 150 YEARS,
AND TO SOME EXTENT,
WE'RE STILL BEING PERCEIVED
AS FOREIGNERS OF SOME SORT,
EVEN THOUGH MANY OF US
WERE BORN HERE
OR MANY OF US HAVE LIVED HERE
MOST OF OUR LIVES,
AND WE COULD EVEN BE SECOND,
THIRD, FOURTH
OR FIFTH GENERATION.
PEOPLE LOOK AT US,
DON'T UNDERSTAND US,
OR THEY THINK
THAT WE ARE THE UNCULTURED
THAT MIX WITH THEIR CULTURE.
THE CHINESE-AMERICAN, THEY
THINK WE ARE NOT CIVILIZED.
I WANT TO CHANGE
ALL THIS STEREOTYPE.
THIS IS MY DREAM.
NARRATOR: SUSAN RATHBORNE,
FORMERLY A BEIJING NATIVE
CALLED SOON WU,
HAS BEEN PURSUING HER DREAM
FOR OVER 50 YEARS.
SHE ARRIVED IN THE QUEENS
DISTRICT OF FLUSHING IN 1946
AFTER MARRYING
AN AMERICAN SOLDIER IN CHINA.
SOON AFTER HER ARRIVAL,
SHE ESTABLISHED
THE FIRST
IMMIGRANT SERVICES CENTER
FOR ASIAN NEWCOMERS.
AND IN 1985, SHE FOUNDED
THE QUEENS CHINESE ASSOCIATION.
TODAY, AT THE AGE OF 82,
SUSAN RATHBORNE,
KNOWN BY EVERYONE IN QUEENS
AS "AUNTIE WU," IS RETIRING.
AT A TESTIMONIAL DINNER,
SHE IS HONORED
BY LEADERS OF MOST IMMIGRANT
COMMUNITIES IN QUEENS.
PRESENT ARE ALSO
THE LEADING CITIZENS
OF FLUSHING'S ASIAN COMMUNITY.
WHEN I COME IN HERE,
I JUST WANT TO TAKE A PICTURE.
SPANISH MEN...
I CAN'T FIND ONE ASIAN FACE,
YELLOW SKIN.
WE CAME BY A HOUSE,
THEY WOULD TELL ME,
"SUSAN, THIS IS HAS
BEEN SOLD TO CHINESE.
"THIS HAS BEEN
SOLD TO CHINESE."
SO WE GET IN TOGETHER
WITH JEWISH PEOPLE.
I'M THE ONLY ONE
IN THIS BUILDING,
CHINESE, FOR 45 YEARS.
[UNINTELLIGIBLE]
NARRATOR: THE SUBSTANTIAL
INCREASE OF ASIAN IMMIGRANTS
TO NEW YORK CITY
DURING THE 1990s
HAS INTENSIFIED
INTERRACIAL TENSION.
A RECENT SURVEY
ON AMERICAN ATTITUDES
TOWARDS ASIAN-AMERICANS
FOUND THAT A LACK OF EDUCATION
WAS THE MOST PREVALENT
EXPLANATION
FOR PREJUDICIAL VIEWS
AGAINST ASIANS.
BUT THE SURVEY ALSO REVEALED
VERY SHARPLY DEFINED
POSITIVE JUDGMENTS
ABOUT ASIAN-AMERICANS.
THE SURVEY FOUND
THAT ASIANS WERE HIGHLY ADMIRED
FOR THEIR WORK ETHIC,
FOR THEIR FAMILY VALUES,
FOR THEIR EXCELLENCE
IN EDUCATION,
FOR THEIR DEDICATION
TOWARDS SUCCESS
IN THEIR LIVES AND CAREERS.
FIRST, I HAVE TO CHALLENGE
THE NOTION
THAT ASIAN-AMERICANS
ARE MORE HIGHLY EDUCATED
OR GENERALLY BETTER WELL-OFF.
ON THE SURFACE,
YOU WOULD THINK
THAT THOSE ARE GOOD
CHARACTERIZATIONS TO HAVE,
BUT I THINK THAT'S
ACTUALLY BEEN A PROBLEM
THAT ASIAN-AMERICANS
HAVE HAD IN THIS COUNTRY.
THAT'S GENERALLY CALLED
THE "MODEL MINORITY MYTH."
SO I STRONGLY DISAGREE WITH
THIS "MODEL MINORITY MYTH,"
OR CHARACTERIZATION
OF ASIAN-AMERICANS IN THIS CITY
BECAUSE QUITE FRANKLY, THERE
ARE MANY ASIAN-AMERICAN KIDS
WHO DON'T DO WELL IN SCHOOLS.
MANY ASIAN-AMERICANS WHO ARE--
FAR MORE ASIAN-AMERICANS
ARE TOILING AWAY
16 HOURS A DAY IN SWEATSHOPS
AND RESTAURANTS THAN YOU SEE
WELL-OFF ASIAN-AMERICANS.
I LOOK AT IT AS PEOPLE WHO COME
WHO HAVE DIFFERENT RELIGIONS,
DIFFERENT ETHNICITIES,
DIFFERENT RACES--
THEY ADD THEIR VOICE
TO THE DEFINITION
OF WHAT IT MEANS
TO BE AN AMERICAN,
AND THAT AMERICA IS CONSTANTLY
BECOMING SOMETHING NEW
BY THE DYNAMISM
AND INTERACTION AND CREATIVITY
OF ITS PEOPLE.
NARRATOR:
ONLY TIME WILL TELL
WHETHER THIS WAVE OF SPICIER
IMMIGRANTS WILL SETTLE
LIKE PREVIOUS IMMIGRANT WAVES
INTO THE SAME OLD AMERICAN
MELTING POT.
OUT OF MANY, ONE,
ONE PEOPLE,
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE.
BUT IN THE MEANTIME,
THE #7 TRAIN CONTINUES
TO LINK THE DISPARATE BITS
OF NEW YORK'S SALAD BOWL.
NEW YORK?
I DON'T KNOW WHAT IT IS.
IT'S SOMETHING.
I'M A NEW YORKER.
I THINK A NEW YORKER IS A PERSON
WHO THINKS HE'S A NEW YORKER
OR SHE'S A NEW YORKER.
A NEW YORKER IS ONE
WHO ALWAYS HAS A PLACE TO GO.
SOMEONE WITH ATTITUDE.
A NEW YORKER IS
A CITIZEN OF THE WORLD.
THAT'S THE DEFINITION
OF A NEW YORKER.
CAPTIONS: BROADCAST TEXT
WWW.BROADCASTTEXT.COM